week2/day9.md, before:

# Day 9 – Tracing API: Building Rich, Observable Request Stories

Yesterday we learned that the OpenTelemetry API is what we use in our code, while the SDK handles configuration. Today we get hands-on with the **Tracing API**, the part of OpenTelemetry that lets us create detailed traces of our application's behavior.

> **Working example:** The complete code for this tutorial is available in [`examples/day9-tracing-api/`](../examples/day9-tracing-api/)

---
## What we already know from Week 1

- **[Day 4](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day4.md):** We learned spans have names, attributes, and parent-child relationships → Today we'll create those ourselves
- **[Day 5](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day5.md):** We learned semantic conventions like `http.request.method` → Today we'll use them in `span.setAttribute()`
- **[Day 6](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day6.md):** We learned auto-instrumentation calls the Tracing API → Today we'll call the same API manually

**The API methods aren't new, we've been learning about them all week.** Today we practice using them.

## What we're building today: A simple greeting service

We're going to build a basic Express API that creates personalized greetings. This simple example will let us focus on learning the Tracing API without getting distracted by complex business logic.

**Our greeting API will:**
1. **Accept a name** - Get the user's name from the URL
2. **Create a greeting** - Generate a personalized message
3. **Add some processing time** - Simulate real work with a small delay

**Why this example is perfect for learning:**
- **Simple and focused** - Easy to understand what each span represents
- **Shows parent-child relationships** - We'll create nested spans
- **Demonstrates key concepts** - Attributes, events, and span lifecycle
- **Quick to test** - Just curl a URL to see results

---
## Step 1: Set up the project

Create a new directory and initialize it:

```bash
mkdir otel-tracing-basics
cd otel-tracing-basics
npm init -y
```

**Install dependencies:**

```bash
npm install express @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/sdk-node @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions @opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http
```

**Our project structure will be:**
```
otel-tracing-api/
├── instrumentation.js    (SDK configuration)
├── app.js                (Express app with manual instrumentation)
└── package.json
```

---

## Step 2: Configure OpenTelemetry (instrumentation.js)

Before we write any application code, we need to set up OpenTelemetry. This configuration tells the SDK how to process and export our telemetry data.

Create `instrumentation.js`:

```javascript
// instrumentation.js
const { NodeSDK } = require("@opentelemetry/sdk-node");
const { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } = require("@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node");
const { OTLPTraceExporter } = require("@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http");
const { resourceFromAttributes } = require("@opentelemetry/resources");
const { ATTR_SERVICE_NAME, ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION } = require("@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions");

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  resource: resourceFromAttributes({
    [ATTR_SERVICE_NAME]: "greeting-service",
    [ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION]: "1.0.0",
  }),
  traceExporter: new OTLPTraceExporter({
    url: "http://localhost:4318/v1/traces",
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()],
});

sdk.start();
console.log("OpenTelemetry initialized");
```

**Let's break down what each part does:**

**Resource configuration:**
```javascript
resource: resourceFromAttributes({
  [ATTR_SERVICE_NAME]: "greeting-service",
  [ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION]: "1.0.0",
})
```
This tells OpenTelemetry "who" is creating the telemetry data. Every span will automatically include these attributes, making it easy to filter traces by service and version in Jaeger.

> **Note:** We use `resourceFromAttributes()` instead of the deprecated `new Resource()` constructor. [OpenTelemetry 2.x](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2025/otel-js-sdk-2-0/) moved away from exporting classes to improve API stability and enable better tree-shaking.

**Trace exporter:**
```javascript
traceExporter: new OTLPTraceExporter({
  url: "http://localhost:4318/v1/traces",
})
```
This tells OpenTelemetry "where" to send trace data. OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) is the standard format, and Jaeger accepts OTLP on port 4318.

**Auto-instrumentation:**
```javascript
instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
```
This automatically creates spans for Express routes, HTTP requests, database calls, and other common operations. We'll add our own manual spans on top of these automatic ones.

**Why we configure this separately:** Remember from [Day 8](./day8.md) - this separation means we can change SDK implementations (standard → vendor distribution) or configuration (100% sampling → 10% sampling) without touching our application code.

---

## Step 3: Create the Express app (app.js)

Create `app.js`:

```javascript
// app.js
const express = require('express');
const { trace } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

const app = express();

// Get a tracer (our span factory)
const tracer = trace.getTracer('greeting-service', '1.0.0');

// Simple greeting endpoint with manual instrumentation
app.get('/hello/:name', (req, res) => {
  // Create a span for our greeting operation
  tracer.startActiveSpan('create_greeting', (span) => {
    const name = req.params.name;
    
    // Add attributes to describe what we're doing
    span.setAttribute('user.name', name);
    span.setAttribute('greeting.type', 'personal');
    
    // Add an event to mark when we start processing
    span.addEvent('processing_started');
    
    // Simulate some processing time
    setTimeout(() => {
      // Create a nested span for message formatting
      tracer.startActiveSpan('format_message', (formatSpan) => {
        const message = `Hello, ${name}! Welcome to OpenTelemetry tracing.`;
        
        formatSpan.setAttribute('message.length', message.length);
        formatSpan.addEvent('message_formatted');
        formatSpan.end();
        
        // Add final attributes and events to parent span
        span.setAttribute('response.message', message);
        span.addEvent('processing_completed');
        span.end();
        
        res.json({ 
          message,
          timestamp: new Date().toISOString()
        });
      });
    }, 100);
  });
});

// Health check endpoint (no manual instrumentation)
app.get('/health', (req, res) => {
  res.json({ status: 'ok' });
});

const PORT = 3000;
app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Greeting service listening on port ${PORT}`);
  console.log('Try: curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Alice');
});
```

---

## Step 4: Start Jaeger (to view traces)

We need a backend to receive and visualize traces. Let's use Jaeger. For this we need Docker Desktop installed and running.

```bash
docker run -d --name jaeger \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 4318:4318 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:latest
```

**Open Jaeger UI:** http://localhost:16686

---

## Step 5: Run the application

Start the app with OpenTelemetry enabled:

```bash
node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
```

We should see:
```
OpenTelemetry initialized
Greeting service listening on port 3000
```

---

## Step 6: Send a test request

Open a new terminal and send a request:

```bash
# Different names to see various traces
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Bob
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Charlie
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Maria
```
or
```
# Names with different lengths (to see message.length attribute vary)
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Jo
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Alexander
```
or
```
# Generate multiple traces quickly
for name in Alice Bob Charlie David Emma; do
  curl http://localhost:3000/hello/$name
  echo ""
done
```

**Expected response:**
```json
{
  "message": "Hello, {name}! Welcome to OpenTelemetry tracing.",
  "timestamp": "2024-01-09T10:30:00.000Z"
}
```
---

## Step 7: View the trace in Jaeger

1. Open http://localhost:16686
2. Select **"greeting-service"** from the Service dropdown
3. Click **"Find Traces"**
4. Click on one trace

**In Jaeger, you'll see the trace waterfall:**
- **Root span**: `GET /hello/:name` (Express route - auto-instrumentation)
- **Request handler span**: `request handler - /hello/:name` (Express middleware - auto-instrumentation)  
- **Business logic span**: `create_greeting` (our manual span)
- **Sub-operation span**: `format_message` (our nested manual span)
- **Events**: Timeline markers showing processing steps
- **Timing**: How long each operation took (103ms total in the example)

![Jaeger trace example](images/day9-jaeger-trace.png)

The complete trace structure has 4 levels:
```
GET /hello/:name (Express route)
└── request handler - /hello/:name (Express middleware)
    └── create_greeting (our manual span)
        └── format_message (our nested span)
```

**What each span represents:**
1. **HTTP request span** - The overall HTTP request lifecycle
2. **Request handler span** - Express processing the specific route
3. **Business logic span** - Our greeting creation logic
4. **Sub-operation span** - The message formatting step

This shows how auto-instrumentation and manual instrumentation work together. Express creates the HTTP context automatically, and our manual spans add business logic context on top.

---
## What just happened?

Let's break down the code we wrote:

### 1. Auto-instrumentation (we didn't write this)

Express auto-instrumentation created the root span automatically:
```javascript
// This happened automatically when the request arrived
GET /hello/Alice
  http.request.method = "GET"
  http.route = "/hello/:name"
  http.response.status_code = 200
```

### 2. Our manual instrumentation (we wrote this)

We wrapped our business logic in spans:

```javascript
tracer.startActiveSpan('create_greeting', (span) => {
  span.setAttribute('user.name', 'name');
  span.setAttribute('greeting.type', 'personal');
  
  // ... more business logic ...
  
  span.end();
});
```

**Key API methods we used:**
- `trace.getTracer()` → Get a tracer ([Day 6](../week1/day6.md) concept: who creates spans)
- `tracer.startActiveSpan()` → Create a span ([Day 4](../week1/day4.md) concept: what's in a span)
- `span.setAttribute()` → Add attributes ([Day 5](../week1/day5.md) concept: semantic conventions)
- `span.addEvent()` → Mark a point in time
- `span.end()` → Finish the span


---

## Best practices

### Do:
- Use `startActiveSpan()` (creates parent-child relationships automatically)
- Always call `span.end()` (or let the callback do it)
- Add meaningful attributes (`user.name`, `message.length`)
- Use events to mark important moments

### Don't:
- Forget to call `span.end()`
- Create spans for trivial operations
- Use timestamps or random IDs as span names

---

## Troubleshooting

### "I don't see traces in Jaeger"

**Checklist:**
1. Is Jaeger running? Check http://localhost:16686
2. Did you start your app with `--require ./instrumentation.js`?
3. Are you calling `span.end()`?
4. Check the console for errors

### "My nested spans aren't showing up as children"

You're probably using `tracer.startSpan()` instead of `tracer.startActiveSpan()`. Use `startActiveSpan()` to automatically set parent-child relationships.

### "Attributes are missing"

Make sure you call `span.setAttribute()` **before** `span.end()`.

---

## What I'm taking into Day 10

Today we learned the **Tracing API** basics with a simple greeting service:

**Key skills:**
- Setting up OpenTelemetry with Express
- Creating manual spans with `tracer.startActiveSpan()`
- Adding attributes with `span.setAttribute()`
- Recording events with `span.addEvent()`
- Creating nested spans for parent-child relationships
- Viewing traces in Jaeger

**The basic pattern:**
```javascript
tracer.startActiveSpan('operation_name', (span) => {
  span.setAttribute('key', 'value');
  span.addEvent('milestone_reached');
  
  // Do work here
  
  span.end();
});
```

**Tomorrow (Day 10)** we'll learn the basics of **Metrics API**.

See you on Day 10!

Commit message:

explain that auto-instrumentation works by wrapping/monkey-patching existing libraries at runtime

week2/day9.md, after:

# Day 9 – Tracing API: Building Rich, Observable Request Stories

Yesterday we learned that the OpenTelemetry API is what we use in our code, while the SDK handles configuration. Today we get hands-on with the **Tracing API**, the part of OpenTelemetry that lets us create detailed traces of our application's behavior.

> **Working example:** The complete code for this tutorial is available in [`examples/day9-tracing-api/`](../examples/day9-tracing-api/)

---
## What we already know from Week 1

- **[Day 4](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day4.md):** We learned spans have names, attributes, and parent-child relationships → Today we'll create those ourselves
- **[Day 5](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day5.md):** We learned semantic conventions like `http.request.method` → Today we'll use them in `span.setAttribute()`
- **[Day 6](https://github.com/juliafmorgado/30DaysOtel/blob/main/week1/day6.md):** We learned auto-instrumentation calls the Tracing API → Today we'll call the same API manually

**The API methods aren't new, we've been learning about them all week.** Today we practice using them.

## What we're building today: A simple greeting service

We're going to build a basic Express API that creates personalized greetings. This simple example will let us focus on learning the Tracing API without getting distracted by complex business logic.

**Our greeting API will:**
1. **Accept a name** - Get the user's name from the URL
2. **Create a greeting** - Generate a personalized message
3. **Add some processing time** - Simulate real work with a small delay

**Why this example is perfect for learning:**
- **Simple and focused** - Easy to understand what each span represents
- **Shows parent-child relationships** - We'll create nested spans
- **Demonstrates key concepts** - Attributes, events, and span lifecycle
- **Quick to test** - Just curl a URL to see results

---
## Step 1: Set up the project

Create a new directory and initialize it:

```bash
mkdir otel-tracing-basics
cd otel-tracing-basics
npm init -y
```

**Install dependencies:**

```bash
npm install express @opentelemetry/api @opentelemetry/sdk-node @opentelemetry/resources @opentelemetry/semantic-conventions @opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node @opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http
```

**Our project structure will be:**
```
otel-tracing-api/
├── instrumentation.js    (SDK configuration)
├── app.js                (Express app with manual instrumentation)
└── package.json
```

---

## Step 2: Configure OpenTelemetry (instrumentation.js)

Before we write any application code, we need to set up OpenTelemetry. This configuration tells the SDK how to process and export our telemetry data.

Create `instrumentation.js`:

```javascript
// instrumentation.js
const { NodeSDK } = require("@opentelemetry/sdk-node");
const { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } = require("@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node");
const { OTLPTraceExporter } = require("@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http");
const { resourceFromAttributes } = require("@opentelemetry/resources");
const { ATTR_SERVICE_NAME, ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION } = require("@opentelemetry/semantic-conventions");

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  resource: resourceFromAttributes({
    [ATTR_SERVICE_NAME]: "greeting-service",
    [ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION]: "1.0.0",
  }),
  traceExporter: new OTLPTraceExporter({
    url: "http://localhost:4318/v1/traces",
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()],
});

sdk.start();
console.log("OpenTelemetry initialized");
```

**Let's break down what each part does:**

**Resource configuration:**
```javascript
resource: resourceFromAttributes({
  [ATTR_SERVICE_NAME]: "greeting-service",
  [ATTR_SERVICE_VERSION]: "1.0.0",
})
```
This tells OpenTelemetry "who" is creating the telemetry data. Every span will automatically include these attributes, making it easy to filter traces by service and version in Jaeger.

> **Note:** We use `resourceFromAttributes()` instead of the deprecated `new Resource()` constructor. [OpenTelemetry 2.x](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2025/otel-js-sdk-2-0/) moved away from exporting classes to improve API stability and enable better tree-shaking.

**Trace exporter:**
```javascript
traceExporter: new OTLPTraceExporter({
  url: "http://localhost:4318/v1/traces",
})
```
This tells OpenTelemetry "where" to send trace data. OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) is the standard format, and Jaeger accepts OTLP on port 4318.

**Auto-instrumentation:**
```javascript
instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
```
This wraps existing libraries at runtime to automatically capture spans for Express routes, HTTP requests, database calls, and other common operations. We'll add our own manual spans on top of these automatic ones.

**Why we configure this separately:** Remember from [Day 8](./day8.md) - this separation means we can change SDK implementations (standard → vendor distribution) or configuration (100% sampling → 10% sampling) without touching our application code.

---

## Step 3: Create the Express app (app.js)

Create `app.js`:

```javascript
// app.js
const express = require('express');
const { trace } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

const app = express();

// Get a tracer (our span factory)
const tracer = trace.getTracer('greeting-service', '1.0.0');

// Simple greeting endpoint with manual instrumentation
app.get('/hello/:name', (req, res) => {
  // Create a span for our greeting operation
  tracer.startActiveSpan('create_greeting', (span) => {
    const name = req.params.name;
    
    // Add attributes to describe what we're doing
    span.setAttribute('user.name', name);
    span.setAttribute('greeting.type', 'personal');
    
    // Add an event to mark when we start processing
    span.addEvent('processing_started');
    
    // Simulate some processing time
    setTimeout(() => {
      // Create a nested span for message formatting
      tracer.startActiveSpan('format_message', (formatSpan) => {
        const message = `Hello, ${name}! Welcome to OpenTelemetry tracing.`;
        
        formatSpan.setAttribute('message.length', message.length);
        formatSpan.addEvent('message_formatted');
        formatSpan.end();
        
        // Add final attributes and events to parent span
        span.setAttribute('response.message', message);
        span.addEvent('processing_completed');
        span.end();
        
        res.json({ 
          message,
          timestamp: new Date().toISOString()
        });
      });
    }, 100);
  });
});

// Health check endpoint (no manual instrumentation)
app.get('/health', (req, res) => {
  res.json({ status: 'ok' });
});

const PORT = 3000;
app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Greeting service listening on port ${PORT}`);
  console.log('Try: curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Alice');
});
```

---

## Step 4: Start Jaeger (to view traces)

We need a backend to receive and visualize traces. Let's use Jaeger. For this we need Docker Desktop installed and running.

```bash
docker run -d --name jaeger \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 4318:4318 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:latest
```

**Open Jaeger UI:** http://localhost:16686

---

## Step 5: Run the application

Start the app with OpenTelemetry enabled:

```bash
node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
```

We should see:
```
OpenTelemetry initialized
Greeting service listening on port 3000
```

---

## Step 6: Send a test request

Open a new terminal and send a request:

```bash
# Different names to see various traces
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Bob
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Charlie
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Maria
```
or
```
# Names with different lengths (to see message.length attribute vary)
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Jo
curl http://localhost:3000/hello/Alexander
```
or
```
# Generate multiple traces quickly
for name in Alice Bob Charlie David Emma; do
  curl http://localhost:3000/hello/$name
  echo ""
done
```

**Expected response:**
```json
{
  "message": "Hello, {name}! Welcome to OpenTelemetry tracing.",
  "timestamp": "2024-01-09T10:30:00.000Z"
}
```
---

## Step 7: View the trace in Jaeger

1. Open http://localhost:16686
2. Select **"greeting-service"** from the Service dropdown
3. Click **"Find Traces"**
4. Click on one trace

**In Jaeger, you'll see the trace waterfall:**
- **Root span**: `GET /hello/:name` (Express route - auto-instrumentation)
- **Request handler span**: `request handler - /hello/:name` (Express middleware - auto-instrumentation)  
- **Business logic span**: `create_greeting` (our manual span)
- **Sub-operation span**: `format_message` (our nested manual span)
- **Events**: Timeline markers showing processing steps
- **Timing**: How long each operation took (103ms total in the example)

![Jaeger trace example](images/day9-jaeger-trace.png)

The complete trace structure has 4 levels:
```
GET /hello/:name (Express route)
└── request handler - /hello/:name (Express middleware)
    └── create_greeting (our manual span)
        └── format_message (our nested span)
```

**What each span represents:**
1. **HTTP request span** - The overall HTTP request lifecycle
2. **Request handler span** - Express processing the specific route
3. **Business logic span** - Our greeting creation logic
4. **Sub-operation span** - The message formatting step

This shows how auto-instrumentation and manual instrumentation work together. Express creates the HTTP context automatically, and our manual spans add business logic context on top.

---
## What just happened?

Let's break down the code we wrote:

### 1. Auto-instrumentation (we didn't write this)

Express auto-instrumentation created the root span automatically:
```javascript
// This happened automatically when the request arrived
GET /hello/Alice
  http.request.method = "GET"
  http.route = "/hello/:name"
  http.response.status_code = 200
```

### 2. Our manual instrumentation (we wrote this)

We wrapped our business logic in spans:

```javascript
tracer.startActiveSpan('create_greeting', (span) => {
  span.setAttribute('user.name', 'name');
  span.setAttribute('greeting.type', 'personal');
  
  // ... more business logic ...
  
  span.end();
});
```

**Key API methods we used:**
- `trace.getTracer()` → Get a tracer ([Day 6](../week1/day6.md) concept: who creates spans)
- `tracer.startActiveSpan()` → Create a span ([Day 4](../week1/day4.md) concept: what's in a span)
- `span.setAttribute()` → Add attributes ([Day 5](../week1/day5.md) concept: semantic conventions)
- `span.addEvent()` → Mark a point in time
- `span.end()` → Finish the span


---

## Best practices

### Do:
- Use `startActiveSpan()` (creates parent-child relationships automatically)
- Always call `span.end()` (or let the callback do it)
- Add meaningful attributes (`user.name`, `message.length`)
- Use events to mark important moments

### Don't:
- Forget to call `span.end()`
- Create spans for trivial operations
- Use timestamps or random IDs as span names

---

## Troubleshooting

### "I don't see traces in Jaeger"

**Checklist:**
1. Is Jaeger running? Check http://localhost:16686
2. Did you start your app with `--require ./instrumentation.js`?
3. Are you calling `span.end()`?
4. Check the console for errors

### "My nested spans aren't showing up as children"

You're probably using `tracer.startSpan()` instead of `tracer.startActiveSpan()`. Use `startActiveSpan()` to automatically set parent-child relationships.

### "Attributes are missing"

Make sure you call `span.setAttribute()` **before** `span.end()`.

---

## What I'm taking into Day 10

Today we learned the **Tracing API** basics with a simple greeting service:

**Key skills:**
- Setting up OpenTelemetry with Express
- Creating manual spans with `tracer.startActiveSpan()`
- Adding attributes with `span.setAttribute()`
- Recording events with `span.addEvent()`
- Creating nested spans for parent-child relationships
- Viewing traces in Jaeger

**The basic pattern:**
```javascript
tracer.startActiveSpan('operation_name', (span) => {
  span.setAttribute('key', 'value');
  span.addEvent('milestone_reached');
  
  // Do work here
  
  span.end();
});
```

**Tomorrow (Day 10)** we'll learn the basics of **Metrics API**.

See you on Day 10!
